At Hebrews 8:1,
the apostle Paul wrote:
“Now this is the main point
of what we are saying.”
When we teach,
we want our main points to stand out.
Why?
Well, which is easier to listen to?
A rambling discourse
that outlines seemingly unrelated facts
or an organized presentation
with main points that relate to the theme?
When we make our main points stand out,
we help our audience to pay attention,
understand, and remember what we say.
So how can you make
the main points stand out?
First, decide on the objective of your talk.
Aim to accomplish something.
If you don’t know your objective,
neither will your audience.
Do you want to inform, convince,
encourage, motivate, or something else?
For example, let’s say
that you’re discussing the resurrection.
If you’re speaking to a grieving family
made up of fellow Christians,
your objective may be
to give encouragement and comfort.
On the other hand,
if you’re speaking about the resurrection
to unbelieving relatives
who have questioned your beliefs,
your objective might be to convince them.
In each instance,
the main points you choose will be different
because the objective is different.
So when preparing,
select only main points
that help you achieve your objective
and that you can teach effectively
in the allotted time.
Then develop the points in a logical order.
Ask yourself:
‘What questions or objections
might my audience have about this topic?
In what logical order would they
raise those questions or objections?’
Often, however,
we are given an outline to develop,
and the main points have already
been selected and put in a certain order.
In such a case,
analyze the outline to have clearly in mind
the objective of the talk
and how the main points
will help you to reach that objective.
As you give the talk,
you don’t want the audience
to lose sight of your theme.
So at various times during your discourse,
repeat key words
in the theme or use synonyms.
Your audience will remember
only a few main points,
so don’t develop too many.
Even if you’re giving a longer talk,
focus on developing a few points well.
As you develop secondary points,
explain their connection to the main point.
Don’t add ideas
just because they’re interesting.
To make your main points stand out,
you might repeat in a sentence or two
each main point before going on to the next.
Or you might state the main points
in the introduction
and then restate them in the conclusion.
When you finish,
the audience should be able
to remember the main points.
Let’s watch a brother
who’s in the middle of giving a talk.
See if you can discern the main point
he’s developing and his theme.
Let’s turn to Proverbs 28:1.
Here the righteous are compared
to a very impressive animal.
“The wicked flee when no one pursues them,
but the righteous
are as confident as a lion.”
You and I can be like a lion.
Imagine that!
Bible writers were familiar with lions
because they were
once plentiful in Israel,
although they are now extinct there.
A lion’s thunderous roar
can be heard for miles.
They can move at a speed
of 40 miles per hour.
They are so powerful
that a single blow from a lion’s paw
is enough to break the neck
of a small antelope.
According to Insight on the Scriptures,
the lion serves as a fitting symbol
of courageous justice.
And so Jesus is called
“the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah.”
Could you tell from that talk
what the theme is?
Is it something about lions?
Jesus? the righteous?
Actually, the theme of this talk is
“Jehovah Makes Us Bold.”
What’s the main point
that the speaker is trying to develop?
Jehovah is the Source of true boldness.
Let’s watch the speaker try again.
This time, notice how he emphasizes
the theme and main point.
Let’s turn to Proverbs 28:1.
As we read this verse,
look for the answer to this question:
What sort of people can be truly confident?
“The wicked flee when no one pursues them,
but the righteous
are as confident as a lion.”
So who can be confident?
The righteous.
And who are the righteous?
Those who have faith in the ransom
and who strive to adhere
to Jehovah’s requirements.
Here’s the point:
Confidence comes not from natural ability,
education, or riches;
the source of true boldness
is our relationship with Jehovah.
So when we go in the ministry,
we don’t need to be afraid.
We’re doing what Jehovah requires,
and Jehovah is supporting us.
Remembering this will help us
to preach with boldness.
This time, the speaker
introduced the scripture in a way
that called attention to the main point.
He avoided cluttering his talk
with details that didn’t support his point.
And to make sure
the audience got the main point,
he told them, “Here’s the point.”
Then, he connected the point to the theme.
Whether from the platform or in the ministry,
our teaching should be simple and clear.
If we group our thoughts
under just a few main points
that relate to our objective and theme,
our presentation will be easy to follow
and hard to forget.